about.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: About Me
permalink: /about/
---

Hello,  
and thanks for being interested in my blog! I hope you will find some interesting stuff here.

My name is [*Sebastian*](/legal/), and I am a student of computer science at the *Technical University of Dortmund*.
In the past, I have also have worked as a freelancer offering coding services in Java & PHP 
(I'm starting my final thesis soon and am focusing on that right now).

I like to code interesting things in my spare time, at the moment focusing on DSLs & their type systems as well as
approaches to create multi-paradigm software by leveraging functional approaches in OOP applications.

When I'm not coding, I am an avid space exploration enthusiast and probably learning something interesting about
the universe today.

I have recently begun this blog as a serious platform to get my thoughts out on some topics, mostly related to
coding, software -development, -engineering & -design as well as language design and its implications of programs.


# On the web

* [Follow me on Twitter](https://twitter.com/NetzwergX)
* [Fork me on GitHub](https://github.com/NetzwergX)

# About the blog

This blog is authored in Markdown and the typesetting for math equations is done via locally-included MathJax.

The static site generator behing it is Jekyll, and the page is hosted on GitHub Pages (see [Privacy Policy](/legal/)).
The PDF are generated using Google Chrome and printing to PDF. Bibliography is provided by Bibtex.JS.

The usage of MathJax and Bibtex.JS means I can easily convert posts to and from LaTex, enabling easy publishing to
the web but also powerful typesetting where needed for PDFs.

The style of the site is the Jekyll Theme "Minima", with slight alterations (mostly to the footer and for printing).

Commit message:

Rework to new blog version
* Use minima theme
* Add new post prepared in may

about.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: About Me
permalink: /about/
---

# About Me

Hello,  
and thanks for being interested in my blog! I hope you will find some interesting stuff here.

My name is [*Sebastian*](/legal/), and I am a student of computer science at the *Technical University of Dortmund*.
In the past, I have also have worked as a freelancer offering coding services in Java & PHP 
(I'm starting my final thesis soon and am focusing on that right now).

I like to code interesting things in my spare time, at the moment focusing on DSLs & their type systems as well as
approaches to create multi-paradigm software by leveraging functional approaches in OOP applications.

When I'm not coding, I am an avid space exploration enthusiast and probably learning something interesting about
the universe today.

I have recently begun this blog as a serious platform to get my thoughts out on some topics, mostly related to
coding, software -development, -engineering & -design as well as language design and its implications of programs.


## On the web

<!--* [Follow me on Twitter](https://twitter.com/NetzwergX)-->
* [Fork me on GitHub](https://github.com/NetzwergX)

## About the blog

This blog is authored in Markdown and the typesetting for math equations is done via locally-included MathJax.

The static site generator behing it is Jekyll, and the page is hosted on GitHub Pages (see [Privacy Policy](/legal/)).
The PDF are generated using Google Chrome and printing to PDF. Bibliography is provided by Bibtex.JS.

The usage of MathJax and Bibtex.JS means I can easily convert posts to and from LaTex, enabling easy publishing to
the web but also powerful typesetting where needed for PDFs.

The style of the site is the Jekyll Theme "Minima", with slight alterations (mostly to the footer and for printing).

### Acknowledgements

* The PDF Icon used on this blog is courtesy of [Simran Singh](https://www.iconfinder.com/SimranSingh) and can be found on
[IconFinder](https://www.iconfinder.com/icons/2133056/document_eps_file_format_pdf_icon).
* I got the idea for the category pages from [Kyle Banks](https://kylewbanks.com/) 
blog post [*"Creating Category Pages in Jekyll without Plugins"*](https://kylewbanks.com/blog/creating-category-pages-in-jekyll-without-plugins)
