---
title: "So WCF 2 gets monolithic now"
layout: article
categories: [WCF]
tags: [WCF, WBB, Maelstrom, software-design, software-architecture, plugin, package, merge]
draft: true
---
Well, not exactly. But a whole lot of the LGPL packages of WoltLab have been merged into the core WCF.
While it yesterday seemed as if all packages would be merged, it was clarified today by WoltLab CEO
Werk that not all packages would be merged into the core, but only those which already had many 
inter-dependencies. So why did they do that, what does it mean, and more importantly, why is the community
so polarized by "The Merge"?


The first thing to keep in mind is that there are many different perspectives - there is the normal
administrator, there is the normal hobbyist who uses WBB (and, in the future, maybe one of the other
standalone applications WoltLab uses) and WCF and is a self-taught programmer, who codes mostly
for himself, but later on starts to realize plugins for WBB / WCF to the community, and then there
it the professional programmer, be it either a student in computer science who works as a programmer
or software engineer alongside his course of studies, or the trained and educated, dedicated software
developer. All of these groups have different interests, pland,, needs and views. So let us take a 
look at the different views, and what the change means to them **directly**. I will discuss 
**indirect** consequences later on.


### Administrators, Board owners and hobby programmers

For these people, the merge is probably something good. More features in the core means less 
packages in the package list that have no real meaning to them to begin with. For them, life
gets easier, since it is less likely not to fullfil the requirements of a plugin. This means
less complications during the installation, and less struggle to find plugins in the store.
For those people, the change is not really of any concern. Yet they participate in the discussion,
without being able to grasp some of the consequences directly, which in turn leads to frustration
and heats up the discussion.

### Software developers

For a software developer, the merge is something with a big impact. One of the important things
for a software developer is to divide his time properly. That also means to avoid duplication.
What does that mean? it means that if a software developer works well with framework X, then he
will do ALL of his work that can reasonably be done with framework X do with said framework. Even if
there is a slight better alternative, the cost of learning another framework will outweigth the 
potential gain in many cases.

WCF 2.0 could have become a great framework with a whole lot a use cases. Be it either a CMS, a wiki,
or a corporate website. This means a software devloper could have realized many projects with WCF 2.0,
thus acquiring more and more knowledge and tricks with it, and in the consequence, help to make it
even better by providing pull-requests for new features and bug fixes.
